{"id": "/home/vraj/DrQA/data/ncert/pdf/Class8/Science//Science810.txt", "text": "How do you come to know that a period is over in your school You come to know easily that someone is at your door when he knocks or you hear the sound of the doorbell. Most of the time you can make out that someone is approaching you by just hearing the foot steps. You might have played a game called hide and seek. In this game a person is blindfolded and has to catch the remaining players. How is the blind folded person able to guess which player is closest to her Sound plays an important role in our lives. It helps us to communicate with one another. We hear a variety of sounds in our surroundings. Make a list of sounds you hear in your surroundings. In the music room of your school you hear the sounds produced by musical instruments tabla , harmonium, etc. Fig 13.1. flute, like How is sound produced How does it travel from one place to another How do we hear sound Why are some sounds louder than others We shall discuss such questions in this chapter. Tabla Sitar Harmonium Flute 3.1 Some musical instruments 201819 \n\n13.1 Sound is Produced by a Activity 13.2 Take a rubber band. Put it around the longer side of a pencil box Fig. 13.3. Insert two pencils between the box and the stretched rubber. Now, pluck the rubber band somewhere in the middle. Do you hear any sound Does the band vibrate Vibrating Body Touch the school bell when not in use. What do you feel Again touch it when producing sound. Can you feel it vibrating Activity 13.1 Take a metal plate or a pan. Hang it at a convenient place in such a way that it does not touch any wall. Now strike it with a stick Fig.13.2. Do you hear a sound Touch the plate or pan gently with your finger. Do you feel the vibrations 3.3 Plucking the rubber band As you learnt in Class the to and fro or back and forth motion of an object is called vibration. When a tightly stretched band is plucked, it vibrates and produces sound. When it stops vibrating, it does not produce any sound. Activity 13.3 Take a metal dish. Pour water in it. Strike it at its edge with a spoon Fig. 13.4. Do you hear a sound Again strike the dish and then touch it. Can you feel the dish vibrating Strike the dish again. Look at the surface of water. Do you see any waves there Now hold the dish. What change do you observe on the surface of water Can you explain the change Is there a hint to connect sound with the vibrations of a body 3.2 Striking a pan Again strike the plate with the stick and hold it tightly with your hands immediately after striking. Do you still hear the sound Touch the plate after it stops producing sound. Can you feel the vibrations now 158 201819 \n\nTable 13.1 Musical Instruments and their Vibrating Parts .No. Musical Vibrating Part Instrument Producing Sound Ve e n a a b l a Stretched string Stretched m e m b r a n e 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . 7 . Many of you might have seen the manjira cymbals, the ghatam, and the noot mudpots and the kartal. These musical instruments are commonly used in many parts of our country. These instruments are simply beaten or struck Fig. 13.6. Can you name a few other musical instruments of this type You too can make a musical instrument. Ghatam 3.4 Vibrating dish produces waves in water We see that a vibrating object produces sound. In some cases, the vibrations are easily visible to us. But in most cases, their amplitude is so small that we cannot see them. However, we can feel them. Activity 13.4 Take a hollow coconut shell and make a musical instrument ektara. You can also make it with the help of an earthen pot Fig. 13.5. Play this instrument and identify its vibrating part. 3.5 Ektara Make a list of familiar musical instruments and identify their vibrating parts. few examples are given in Table 13.1. Complete rest of the Table. Manjira 3.6 few more musical instruments 159 201819 \n\nActivity 13.5 Take 68 bowls or tumblers. Fill them with water up to different levels, increasing gradually from one end to the other. Now take a pencil and strike the bowls gently. Strike all of them in succession. You will hear pleasant sounds. This is your jaltrang Fig.13.7. When we speak, does any part of our body vibrate 13.2 Sound Produced by Humans Speak loudly for a while or sing a song, or buzz like a bee. Put your hand on your throat as shown in 3.8. Do you feel any vibrations In humans, the sound is produced by the voice box or the larynx. Put your fingers on the throat and find a hard bump that seems to move when you swallow. This part of the body is known as the voice box. It is at the upper end of the windpipe. Two vocal cords, are stretched across the voice box or larynx in such a way that it leaves a narrow slit between them for the passage of air Fig.13.8. 3.7 Jaltrang When we pluck the string of an instrument, like the sitar, the sound that we hear is not only that of the string. The whole instrument is forced to vibrate, and it is the sound of the vibration of the instrument that we hear. Similarly, when we strike the membrane of a mridangam, the sound that we hear is not only that of the membrane but of the whole body of the instrument. 160 Fig.13.8 Voice box in humans When the lungs force air through the slit, the vocal cords vibrate, producing sound. Muscles attached to the vocal cords can make the cords tight or loose. When the vocal cords are tight and thin, the type or quality of voice is different 201819 \n\nfrom that when they are loose and thick. Let us see how the vocal cords function. Activity 13.6 Take two rubber strips of the same size. Place these two pieces one above the other and stretch them tight. Now blow air through the gap between them 3.9a. As the air blows through the stretched rubber strips, a sound is produced. You can also take a piece of paper with a narrow slit and hold it between your fingers as shown in 3.9 b. Now blow through the slit and listen to the sound. Our vocal cords produce sound in a similar manner. The vocal cords in men are about 20 mm long. In women these are about 15 mm long. Children have very short vocal cords. This is the reason why the voices of men, women and children are different. 13.3 Sound Needs a Medium for Propagation When you call up your friend who is standing at a distance, your friend is able to hear your voice. How does the sound propagate or travel to her Activity 13.7 Take a metal or glass tumbler. Make sure that it is dry. Place a cell phone in it. Remember that the cell phone must not be kept in water. Ask your friend to give a ring on this cell phone from another cell phone. Listen to the ring carefully. Now, surround the rim of the tumbler with your hands 3.10. Put your mouth on the a b 3.9 a, b Working of vocal cords 3.10 Sound needs a medium to travel 161 201819 \n\nPlace your ear gently on the water surface 3.11. Be careful the water should not enter in your ear. Can you hear the sound of the bell Does it indicate that sound can travel through liquids Oh That is how whales and dolphins might be communicating under water. Let us find out if sound can travel through solids also. Activity 13.9 Take a metre scale or a long metal rod and hold its one end to your ear. Ask your friend to gently scratch or tap at the other end of the scale 3.12. opening between your hands. Indicate to your friend to give a ring again. Listen to the ring while sucking air from the tumbler. Does the sound become fainter as you suck air Remove the tumbler from your mouth. Does the sound become loud again Can you think of an explanation Is it possible that the decreasing amount of air in the tumbler had something to do with decreasing loudness of the ring Indeed, if you had been able to suck all the air in the tumbler, you will not listen any sound. Actually, sound needs a medium to travel. When air has been removed completely from a vessel, it is said that there is a vacuum in the vessel. The sound cannot travel through a vacuum. Does sound travel in liquids Let us find out. Activity 13.8 Take a bucket or a bathtub. Fill it with clean water. Take a small bell in one hand. Shake this bell inside the water to produce sound. Make sure that the bell does not touch the body of the bucket or the tub. 3.12 Sound travelling through a metre scale Can you hear the sound of the scratching Ask your friends around you if they were able to hear the same sound 3.11 Sound travelling through water 162 201819 \n\nYou can also perform the above activity by placing your ear at one end of a long wooden or metallic table and asking your friend to gently scratch the other end of the table 3.13. 3.13 Sound can travel through solids We find that sound can travel through wood or metal. In fact, sound can travel through any solid. You can perform interesting activities to show that sound can also travel through strings. Have you ever made a toy telephone 3.14. Can you say that sound can travel through strings 13.4 We Hear Sound through Our Ears The shape of the outer part of the ear is like a funnel. When sound enters it, it travels down a canal at the end of which there is a thin stretched membrane. It is called the eardrum. It performs an important function. To understand what the eardrum does, let us build a tincan model of the eardrum. Activity 13.10 Take a plastic or tincan. Cut its ends. Stretch a piece of rubber balloon across one end of the can and fasten it with a rubber band. Put four or five grains of dry cereal on the stretched rubber. Now ask your friend to speak Hurrey, Hurrey from the open end Fig.13.15. Observe what happens to the grain. Why do the grains jump up and down 3.14 toy telephone We have learnt so far that vibrating objects produce sound and it is carried in all directions in a medium. The medium could be a gas, a liquid or a solid. How do we hear it 3.15 Understanding action of an eardrum 163 201819 \n\nThe eardrum is like a stretched rubber sheet. Sound vibrations make the eardrum vibrate Fig. 13.16. The eardrum sends vibrations to the inner ear. From there, the signal goes to the brain. That is how we hear. Inner ear Eardrum 3.16 Human ear We must put a sharp, pointed or hard thing into our ear. It can damage the eardrum. The damaged eardrum can impair hearing. 13.5 Amplitude, Time Period and Frequency of a Vibration We have learnt that the to and fro motion of an object is known as vibration. This motion is also called oscillatory motion. 164 You have already learnt in earlier classes about the oscillatory motion and its time period. The number of oscillations per second is called the frequency of oscillation. Frequency is expressed in hertz. Its symbol is Hz. frequency of 1 Hz is one oscillation per second. If an object oscillates 20 times in one second, what would be its frequency You can recognise many familiar sounds without seeing the objects producing them. How is it possible These sounds must be different to enable you to recognise them. Have you ever thought what factors make them different Amplitude and frequency are two important properties of any sound. Can we differentiate sounds on the basis of their amplitudes and frequencies Loudness and Pitch Activity 13.11 Take a metallic tumbler and a tablespoon. Strike the tablespoon gently at the brim of the tumbler. 3.17 Thermocol ball touching the vibrating glass tumbler 201819 \n\nCompare the sound of a baby with that of an adult. Is there any difference Even if two sounds are equally loud, they differ in some way. Let us see how. wonder why my voice is different from that of my teacher. The frequency determines the shrillness or pitch of a sound. If the frequency of vibration is higher we say that the sound is shrill and has a higher pitch. If the frequency of vibration is lower, we say that the sound has a lower pitch. For example, a drum vibrates with a low frequency. Therefore, it produces Hear the sound produced. Now bang the spoon on the tumbler and hear the sound produced again. Is the sound louder when the tumbler is struck hard Now suspend a small thermocol ball touching the rim of the tumbler 3.17. Vibrate the tumbler by striking it. See how far the ball is displaced. The displacement of the ball is a measure of the amplitude of vibration of the tumbler. Now, strike the tumbler gently and then a little harder. Compare the amplitudes of vibrations of the tumbler in the two cases. In which case is the amplitude larger Loudness of sound is proportional to the square of the amplitude of the vibration producing the sound. For example, if the amplitude becomes twice, the loudness increases by a factor of 4. The loudness is expressed in a unit called decibel d. The following table gives some idea of the loudness of sound coming from various sources. Normal breathing Soft whisper at 5m Normal conversation Busy traffic Average factory 10 d 30 d 60 d 70 d 80 d Above 80 d the noise becomes physically painful. The loudness of sound depends on its amplitude. When the amplitude of vibration is large, the sound produced is loud. When the amplitude is small, the sound produced is feeble. 3.18 Frequency determines the pitch of a sound 165 201819 \n\na lowpitched sound. On the other hand, a whistle has a high frequency and therefore, produces a sound of higher pitch 3.18. bird makes a highpitched sound whereas a lion makes a lowpitched roar. However, the roar of a lion is very loud while the sound of the bird is quite feeble. Every day you hear the voices of children and adults. Do you find any difference in their voices Can you say that the frequency of the voice of a child is higher than that of an adult Usually the voice of a woman has a higher frequency than that of a man. 13.6 Audible and Inaudible Sounds We know that we need a vibrating body for the production of sound. Can we hear the sound of all vibrating bodies The fact is that sounds of frequencies less than about 20 vibrations per second 20 Hz cannot be detected by the human ear. Such sounds are called inaudible. On the higher side, sounds of frequencies higher than about 20,000 vibrations per second 20 kHz are also not audible to the human ear. Thus, for human ear, the range of audible frequencies is roughly from 20 to 20,000 Hz. Some animals can hear sounds of frequencies higher than 20,000 Hz. Dogs have this ability. The police use high frequency whistles which dogs can hear but humans cannot. The ultrasound equipment, familiar to us for investigating and tracking many medical problems, works at frequencies higher than 20,000 Hz. 166 13.7 Noise and Music We hear dif ferent types of sounds around us. Is the sound always pleasing Does a sound sometimes cause discomfort to you Some sounds are pleasant to the ear, whereas some are not. Suppose construction work is going on in your neighbourhood. Are the sounds coming from the construction site pleasing Do you enjoy the sounds produced by horns of buses and trucks Such unpleasant sounds are called noise. In a classroom, if all the students speak together, what would the sound produced be called On the other hand you enjoy sounds from musical instruments. Musical sound is one which is pleasing to the ear. Sound produced by a harmonium is a musical sound. The string of a sitar also gives out a musical sound. But, if a musical sound becomes too loud, would it remain melodious 13.8 Noise Pollution You already know about air pollution. Presence of unwanted gases and particles in air is called air pollution. Similarly, presence of excessive or unwanted sounds in the environment is called noise pollution. Can you list some sources of noise pollution Major causes of noise pollution are sounds of vehicles, explosions including bursting of crackers, machines, loudspeakers etc. What sources in the home may lead to noise Television and transistor radio at high volumes, some kitchen appliances, desert coolers, air conditioners, all contribute to noise pollution. 201819 \n\nWhat are the Harms of Noise Pollution Do you know that presence of excessive noise in the surroundings may cause many health related problems. Lack of sleep, hypertension high blood pressure, anxiety and many more health disorders may be caused by noise pollution. person who is exposed to a loud sound continuously may get temporary or even permanent impairment of hearing. Measures to Limit Noise Pollution To control noise, we must control the sources of noise. How can this be achieved For this, silencing devices must be installed in air craft engines, t r a n s p o r t v e h i c l e s , i n d u s t r i a l machines and home appliances. How can the noise pollution be controlled in a residential area All n o i s y o p e r a t i o n s m u s t b e conducted away from any residential area. Noise producing industries should be set up away from such a r e a s . s e o f a u t o m o b i l e h o r n s should be minimised. and music s y s t e m s s h o u l d b e r u n a t l o w volumes. Trees must be planted along the roads and around buildings to cut down on the sounds reaching the residents, thus reducing the harmful effects of noise pollution. Hearing Impairment Total hearing impairment, which is rare, is usually from birth itself. Partial disability is generally the result of a disease, injury or age. Children with impaired hearing need special care. By learning sign language, such children can communicate effectively. Because speech develops as the direct result of hearing, a child with a hearing loss may have defective speech also. Technological devices for the hearingimpaired have made it possible for such persons to improve their quality of life. Society can do much to improve the living environment for the hearingimpaired and help them live normal lives. 167 201819 \n\n hertz Hz Sound is produced by vibrating objects. In human beings, the vibration of the vocal cords produces sound. Sound travels through a medium gas, liquid or solid. It cannot travel in vacuum. The eardrum senses the vibrations of sound, It sends the signals to the brain. This process is called hearing. The number of oscillations or vibrations per second is called the frequency of oscillation. The frequency is expressed in hertz Hz Larger the amplitude of vibration, the louder is the sound. Higher the frequency of vibration, the higher is the pitch, and shriller is the sound. Unpleasant sounds are called noise. Excessive or unwanted sounds lead to noise pollution. Noise pollution may pose health problems for human beings. Attempts should be made to minimise noise pollution. Plantation on the roadside and elsewhere can reduce noise pollution."}