{"id": "/home/vraj/DrQA/data/ncert/pdf/Class8/Science//Science81.txt", "text": "3.1 What are Synthetic Fibres Try to recall the uniform pattern found in a necklace of beads joined with the help of a thread .1a. Or, try to join a number of paper clips together to make a long chain, as in .1 b. Is there any similarity between the two he clothes which we wear are made of fabrics. Fabrics are made from fibres obtained from natural or artificial sources. Can you name some natural fibres Fibres are also used for making a large variety of household articles. Make a list of some common articles made from fibres. Try to separate them into those made from natural fibres and those made from artificial fibres. Make entries in Table 3.1. Table 3.1 Natural and Artificial Fibres . No. Name of Article Type of Fibre Natural artificial a b .1 a Beads and b Paper clips joined to form long chains Why did you label some fibres as artificial You have read in your previous classes that natural fibres like cotton, wool, silk, etc., are obtained from plants or animals. The synthetic fibres, on the other hand, are made by human beings. That is why these are called synthetic or manmade fibres. synthetic fibre is also a chain of small units joined together. Each small unit is actually a chemical substance. Many such small units combine to form a large single unit called a polymer. The word polymer comes from two Greek words poly meaning many and mer meaning partunit. So, a polymer is made of many repeating units. 201819 \n\nNylon Nylon is another manmade fibre. In 1931, it was made without using any natural raw material from plant or animal. It was prepared from coal, water and air. It was the first fully synthetic fibre. Nylon fibre was strong, elastic and light. It was lustrous and easy to wash. So, it became very popular for making clothes. We use many articles made from nylon, such as socks, ropes, tents, toothbrushes, car seat belts, sleeping bags, curtains, etc. .3. Nylon is Polymers occur in nature also. Cotton, for example, is a polymer called cellulose. Cellulose is made up of a large number of glucose units. 3.2 Types of Synthetic Fibres Rayon You have read in Class that silk fibre obtained from silkworm was discovered in China and was kept as a closely guarded secret for a long time. Fabric obtained from silk fibre was very costly. But its beautiful texture fascinated everybody. Attempts were made to make silk artificially. Towards the end of the nineteenth century, scientists were successful in obtaining a fibre having properties similar to that of silk. Such a fibre was obtained by chemical treatment of wood pulp. This fibre was called rayon or artificial silk. Although rayon is obtained from a natural source, wood pulp, yet it is a manmade fibre. It is cheaper than silk and can be woven like silk fibres. It can also be dyed in a wide variety of colours. Rayon is mixed with cotton to make bed sheets or mixed with wool to make carpets. .2. .3 Various articles made from nylon Is nylon fibre really so strong that we can make nylon parachutes and ropes for rock climbing 33 .2 Articles made of rayon 201819 \n\na pan so that weight can be placed in it. Add weight one by one till the thread breaks. Note down the total weight required to break the thread. This weight indicates the strength of the fibre. Repeat the same activity with threads of wool, polyester, silk and nylon. Tabulate the data as shown in Table 3.2. Arrange the threads in order of their increasing strength. Observation Table 3.2 . No. Type of Total Weight required ThreadFibre to break the Thread 1. 2. 3. 4. Cotton Wool Silk Nylon You may use a hook or a nail on the wall for hanging the fibres and a polythene bag at the other end. n p l a c e o f w e i g h t s y o u m a y u s e m a r b l e s o r p e b b l e s o f similar size. Precaution Note that all threads should be of the same length and almost of the same thickness. Polyester and Acrylic Polyester is another synthetic fibre. Fabric made from this fibre does not get wrinkled easily. It remains crisp and is easy to wash. So, it is quite suitable for making dress material. You must have seen people wearing polyester shirts and other dresses. Terylene is a popular polyester. It can be drawn into very fine .4 Use of nylon Fibres also used for making parachutes and ropes for rock climbing Fig. 3.4. nylon thread is actually stronger than a steel wire. Let us find out. Activity 3.1 Take an iron stand with a clamp. Take a cotton thread of about 60 cm length. Tie it to the clamp so that it hangs freely from it as shown in .5. At the free end suspend .5 An iron stand with a thread hanging from the clamp 34 201819 \n\nfibres that can be woven like any other yarn. My mother always buys bottles and jars for storing rice and sugar. wonder what is polyethylene terephthalate is a very familiar form of polyester. It is used for making bottles, utensils, films, wires and many other useful products. Look around and make a list of things made of polyester. Polyester Polyester is actually made up of the repeating units of a chemical called an ester. Esters are the chemicals which give fruits their smell. Fabrics are sold by names like polycot, polywool, terrycot, etc. As the name suggests, these are made by mixing two types of fibres. Polycot is a mixture of polyester and cotton. Polywool is a mixture of polyester and wool. We wear sweaters and use shawls or blankets in the winter. Many of these are actually not made from natural wool, though they appear to resemble wool. These are prepared from another type of synthetic fibre called acrylic. h e w o o l o b t a i n e d f r o m n a t u r a l sources is quite expensive, whereas clothes made from acrylic are relatively cheap. They are available in a variety o f c o l o u r s . y n t h e t i c f i b r e s a r e more durable and affordable which m a k e s t h e m m o r e p o p u l a r t h a n natural fibres. You have already perfor med an a c t i v i t y o f b u r n i n g n a t u r a l a n d synthetic fibres Activity 3.6 of Class . What did you observe When you burn synthetic fibres you find that their behaviour is different from that of the natural fibres. You must have noticed that synthetic fibres melt on heating. This is actually a disadvantage of synthetic fibres. If the clothes catch fire, it can be disastrous. The fabric melts and sticks to the body of the person wearing it. We should, therefore, not wear synthetic clothes while working in in the kitchen or in a laboratory. Oh Now understand why my mother never wears polyester clothes while working in the kitchen. All the synthetic fibres are prepared by a number of processes using raw materials of petroleum origin, called petrochemicals. 3.3 Characteristics of Synthetic Fibres Imagine that it is a rainy day. What kind of umbrella would you use and why Synthetic fibres possess unique characteristics which make them popular dress materials. They dry up quickly, are durable, less expensive, readily available and easy to maintain. Perform the following activity and learn for yourself. 35 201819 \n\nActivity 3.2 Take two cloth pieces of the same size, roughly half a metre square each. One of these should be from natural fibre. The other could be a synthetic fibre. You can take help of your parents in selecting these pieces. Soak the pieces in different mugs each containing the same amount of water. Take the pieces out of the containers after five minutes and spread them in the sun for a few minutes. Compare the volume of the water remaining in each container. Do synthetic fabrics soak lessmore water than the natural fabrics Do they take lessmore time to dry What does this activity tell you about the characteristics of the synthetic fabrics Find out from your parents about the durability, cost and maintenance of these fabrics, compared to the natural fabrics. 3.4 Plastics You must be familiar with many plastic articles used everyday. Make a list of such items and their uses. a b .6 a Linear b Crosslinked arrangements 36 Plastic is also a polymer like the synthetic fibre. All plastics do not have the same type of arrangement of units. In some it is linear, whereas in others it is crosslinked. Fig. 3.6. Plastic articles are available in all possible shapes and sizes as you can s e e i n i g . 3 . 7 . a v e y o u e v e r wondered how this is possible The fact is that plastic is easily mouldable i.e. can be shaped in any form. Plastic can be recycled, reused, coloured, melted, rolled into sheets or made into wires. That is why it finds such a variety of uses. .7 Various articles made of plastics Polythene Polyethene is an example of a plastic. It is used for making commonly used polythene bags. Now, try to bend a piece of plastic yourself. Can all the plastic articles be bent easily You will observe that some plastic articles can bend easily while some break when forced to bend. When we 201819 \n\nadd hot water to a plastic bottle, it gets deformed. Such plastic which gets deformed easily on heating and can be bent easily are known as thermoplastics. Polythene and are some of the examples of thermoplastics. These are used for manufacturing toys, combs and various types of containers. On the other hand, there are some plastics which when moulded once, can not be softened by heating. These are called thermosetting plastics. Two examples are bakelite and melamine. Bakelite is a poor conductor of heat and electricity. It is used for making electrical switches, handles of various utensils, etc. Melamine is a versatile material. It resists fire and can tolerate heat better than other plastics. It is used for making floor tiles, kitchenware and fabrics which resist fire. .8 shows the various uses of thermoplastics and thermosetting plastics. Articles made of thermosetting plastics Articles made of thermoplastics .8 Some articles made of plastic 3.5 Plastics as Materials of Choice Today if we think of storing a food item, water, milk, pickles, dry food etc., plastic containers seem most convenient. This is because of their light weight, lower price, good strength and easy handling. Being lighter as compared to metals, plastics are used in cars, aircrafts and spacecrafts, too. The list is endless if we start counting articles like slippers, furniture, decoration pieces, etc. Now, let us discuss the characteristic properties of plastics. Plastic is Nonreactive You know that metals like iron get rusted when left exposed to moisture and air. But plastics do not react with water and air. They are not corroded easily. That is why they are used to store various kinds of material, including many chemicals. Plastic is Light, Strong and Durable Talk to your parents or grandparents about the types of buckets that were used in the past. What is the material of the buckets or mugs you are using today What are the advantages of using a plastic container Since plastic is very light, strong, durable and can be moulded into different shapes and sizes, it is used for various purposes. Plastics are generally cheaper than metals. They are widely used in industry and for household articles. Make a list of different kinds of plastic containers that you use in daily life. 37 201819 \n\nPlastics are Poor Conductors You have learnt above that plastics are poor conductors of heat and electricity. That is why electrical wires have plastic covering, and handles of screw drivers are made of plastic. As mentioned above, handles of frying pans are also made of plastic. Did You Know Plastics find extensive use in the healthcare industry. Some examples of their use are the packaging of tablets, threads used for stitching wounds, syringes, doctors gloves and a number of medical instruments. Special plastic cookware is used in microwave ovens for cooking food. In microwave ovens, the heat cooks the food but does not affect the plastic vessel. Teflon is a special plastic on which oil and water do not stick. It is used for nonstick coating on cookwares. Fireproof plastics Although synthetic fibre catches fire easily, it is interesting to know that the uniforms of firemen have coating of melamine plastic to make them flame resistant. 3.6 Plastics and the Environment When we go to the market, we usually get things wrapped in plastic or packed in polythene bags. That is one reason why plastic waste keeps getting accumulated in our homes. Ultimately, plastic finds its way to the garbage. Disposal of plastic is a major problem. Why material which gets decomposed through natural processes, such as action by bacteria, is called biodegradable. material which is not easily decomposed by natural processes is termed nonbiodegradable. Look at Table 3.3. Table 3.3 Type of Waste Approximate Time Nature of Material taken to Degenerate Peels of vegetable and fruits, 1 to 2 weeks Biodegradable leftover foodstuff, etc. Paper Cotton cloth Wood Woollen clothes 10 to 30 days 2 to 5 months 10 to15 years About a year Biodegradable Biodegradable Biodegradable Biodegradable Tin, aluminium, and other 100 to 500 years Nonbiodegradable metal cans Plastic bags Several years Nonbiodegradable Source httpedugreen.teri.res.inexploresolwastetypes.htm 38 201819 \n\nSince plastic takes several years to decompose, it is not environment friendly. It causes environmental pollution. Besides, the burning process in the synthetic material is quite slow and it does not get completely burnt easily. In the process it releases lots of poisonous fumes into the atmosphere causing air pollution. How can this problem be solved Have you ever seen a garbage dump where animals are eating garbage In the process of eating the food waste they swallow materials like polythene bags and wrappers of food. Can you imagine the consequences The plastic material chokes the respiratory system of these animals, or forms a lining in their stomachs and can be the cause of their death. The polybags carelessly thrown here and there are responsible for clogging the drains, too. Sometimes we are very careless and throw the wrappers of chips, biscuits and other eatables on the road or in parks or picnic places. Should we not think twice before doing so As a responsible citizen what measures do you suggest to keep public places clean and free of plastic Avoid the use of plastics as far as possible. Make use of bags made of cotton or jute when you go for shopping. The biodegradable and non biodegradable wastes should be collected separately and disposed off separately. Practise this in your homes. Can you suggest some other ways in which you can contribute towards reducing the use of plastic materials It is better to recycle plastic waste. Most of the thermoplastics can be recycled. Make a list of items that can be recycled. However, during recycling certain colouring agents are added. This limits its usage especially for storage of food. As a responsible citizen remember the 5 principle. Reduce, Reuse, Recycle, Recover and Refuse. Develop habits which are environment friendly. Fibrewise Do not throw plastic bags in the water bodies or on the road. Take a cotton carry bag or a jute bag while going for shopping. Try to minimise the use of plastic materials e.g., use a steel lunch box instead of a plastic one. 39 201819 \n\n Synthetic fibres and plastics, like natural fi bres, are made of very large units called poly mers. Polymers are made up of many smaller units. While natural fibres are obtained from plants and animals, synthetic fibres are obtained by chemical processing of petrochemicals. Like natural fibres, these fibres can also be woven into fabrics. Synthetic fibres find uses ranging from many household articles like ropes, buckets, furniture, containers, etc., to highly specialised uses in aircrafts, ships, space crafts, healthcare, etc. Depending upon the types of chemicals used for manufacturing synthetic fibres, they are called Rayon, Nylon, Polyester and Acrylic. The different types of fibres differ from one another in their strength, water absorbing capacity, nature of burning, cost, durability etc. Today, life without plastics cannot be imagined. Be it home, or outside, plastic is everywhere. The waste created by plastics is not environment friendly. On burning, plastics release poisonous gases. On dumping in the ground they may take years to degenerate. This is because of their nonbiodegradable nature. We need to use synthetic fibres and plastics in such a manner that we can enjoy their good qualities and at the same time minimise the environmental hazards for the living communities. 40 201819"}