{"id": "/home/vraj/DrQA/data/ncert/pdf/Class8/Science//Science85.txt", "text": "We use various materials for our basic needs. Some of them are found in nature and some have been made by human efforts. Activity 5.1 Make a list of various materials used by us in daily life and classify them as natural and manmade. Natural Manmade Does this list include air, water, soil and minerals Since all these are obtained from nature, they are called natural resources. Can we use all our natural resources forever Can air, water and soil be exhausted by human activities You have already studied about water in Class . Is water a limitless resource In the light of the availability of various resources in nature, natural resources can be broadly classified into two kinds i Inexhaustible Natural Resources These resources are present in unlimited quantity in nature and are not likely to be exhausted by human activities. Examples are sunlight, air. ii Exhaustible Natural Resources The amount of these resources in nature is limited. They can be exhausted by human activities. Examples of these resources are forests, wildlife, minerals, coal, petroleum, natural gas etc. Activity 5.2 It is a group activity Take some containers. Fill them with popcornpeanutsroasted gramtoffees. Divide students into groups of seven each. Further divide each group into three subgroups containing 1, 2 and 4 students. Label them as first, second and third generation respectively. 201819 \n\nThese subgroups represent the consumers. As population is growing, second and third generations have larger number of consumers. Put one full container for each group on a table. Ask consumers of the first generation from each group to consume eatables from the container of their group. Now, ask the second generation consumers from each group to do the same. Ask students to observe carefully the availability of eatables in each container. If some thing is left in the containers, ask third generation from each group to consume it. Now, finally observe whether all the consumers of the third generation got the eatables or not. Also observe if anything is still left in any of the containers. Assume that the eatables in the c o n t a i n e r r e p r e s e n t t h e t o t a l availability of an exhausible natural resource like coal, petroleum or natural gas. Each group may have a different consumption pattern. Are the earlier generations of any group too greedy It may be that the earlier generations in some groups were c o n c e r n e d a b o u t t h e c o m i n g generations and left something for them. In this chapter we will learn about some exhaustible natural resources like coal, petroleum and natural gas. These were formed from the dead remains of living organisms fossils. So, these are all known as fossil fuels. 5.1 Coal You may have seen coal or heard about it .1. It is as hard as stone and is black in colour. .1 Coal Coal is one of the fuels used to cook food. Earlier, it was used in railway engines to produce steam to run the engine. It is also used in thermal power plants to produce electricity. Coal is also used as a fuel in various industries. Story of Coal Where do we get coal from and how is it formed About 300 million years ago the earth had dense forests in low lying wetland areas. Due to natural processes, like flooding, these forests got buried under the soil. As more soil deposited over them, they were compressed. The temperature also rose as they sank deeper and deeper. Under high pressure and high temperature, dead plants got slowly converted to coal. As coal contains mainly carbon, the slow process of conversion of dead vegetation into coal is called carbonisation. Since it was formed from the remains of vegetation, coal is also called a fossil fuel. coal mine is shown in .2. 57 201819 \n\n.2 coal mine When heated in air, coal burns and produces mainly carbon dioxide gas. Coal is processed in industry to get some useful products such as coke, coal tar and coal gas. Coke It is a tough, porous and black substance. It is an almost pure form of carbon. Coke is used in the manufacture of steel and in the extraction of many metals. Coal Tar It is a black, thick liquid .3 with an unpleasant smell. It is a mixture of .3 Coal tar 58 about 200 substances. Products obtained from coal tar are used as starting materials for manufacturing various substances used in everyday life and in industry, like synthetic dyes, drugs, explosives, per fumes, plastics, paints, photographic materials, roofing materials, etc. Interestingly, naphthalene balls used to repel moths and other insects are also obtained from coal tar. These days, bitumen, a petroleum product, is used in place of coaltar for metalling the roads. Coal Gas Coal gas is obtained during the processing of coal to get coke. It is used Coal gas was used for street lighting for the first time in London in 1810 and in New York around 1820. Now a days, it is used as a source of heat rather than light. 201819 \n\nas a fuel in many industries situated near the coal processing plants. transformed the dead organisms into petroleum and natural gas. 5.2 Petroleum You know that petrol is used as a fuel in light automobiles such as motor cycles scooters and cars. Heavy motor vehicles like trucks and tractors run on diesel. Petrol and diesel are obtained from a natural resource called petroleum. The word petroleum is derived from petra rock and oleum oil as it is mined from between the rocks under Earth as shown in .4. Do you know how petroleum is formed formed Petroleum was from organisms living in the sea. As these organisms died, their bodies settled at the bottom of the sea and got covered with layers of sand and clay. Over millions of years, absence of air, high temperature and high pressure Look at .4. It shows the deposits of petroleum and natural gas. You see that the layer containing petroleum oil and gas is above that of water. Why is it so Recall that oil and gas are lighter than water and do not mix with it. The worlds first oil well was drilled in Pennsylvania, , in 1859. Eight years later, in 1867, oil was struck at Makum in Assam. In India, oil is found in Assam, Gujarat, Mumbai High and in the river basins of Godavari and Krishna. Refining of Petroleum Petroleum is a dark oily liquid. It has an unpleasant odour. It is a mixture of various constituents such as petroleum gas, petrol, diesel, lubricating oil, paraffin wax, etc. The process of Wells Impervious rock Gas Oil Water Reservoir rock 59 .4 Petroleum and natural gas deposits 201819 \n\nVarious constituents of petroleum and their uses are given in Table 5.1. Many useful substances are obtained from petroleum and natural gas. These are termed as Petrochemicals. These are used in the manufacture of detergents, fibres polyester, nylon, acrylic etc., polythene and other manmade plastics. Hydrogen gas obtained from natural gas, is used in the production of fertilisers urea. Due its great commercial importance, petroleum is also called black gold. to 5.3 Natural Gas Natural gas is a very important fossil fuel because it is easy to transport through pipes. Natural gas is stored under high pressure as compressed natural gas . is used for power generation. It is now being used .5 petroleum refinery separating the various constituents fractions of petroleum is known as refining. It is carried out in a petroleum refinery .5. Table 5.1 Various Constituents of Petroleum and their Uses .No. Constituents of Petroleum Uses 1. Petroleum Gas in Liquid form Fuel for home and industry 2. Petrol Kerosene Diesel 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 60 Motor fuel, aviation fuel, solvent for dry cleaning Fuel for stoves, lamps and for jet aircrafts Fuel for heavy motor vehicles, electric generators Lubricating oil Lubrication Paraffin wax Bitumen Ointments, candles, vaseline etc. Paints, road surfacing 201819 \n\nas a fuel for transport vehicles because it is less polluting. It is a cleaner fuel. The great advantage of is that it can be used directly for burning in homes and factories where it can be supplied through pipes. Such a network of pipelines exists in Vadodara Gujarat, some parts of Delhi and other places. Natural gas is also used as a starting material for the manufacture of a number of chemicals and fertilisers. India has vast reserves of natural gas. In our country, natural gas has been found in Tripura, Rajasthan, Maharashtra and in the Krishna Godavari delta. Can coal, petroleum and natural gas be prepared in the laboratory from dead organisms No. Their formation is a very slow process and conditions for their formation cannot be created in the laboratory. 5.4 Some Natural Resources are Limited You have studied in the beginning of the chapter that some natural resources are exhaustible like fossil fuels, forests, minerals etc. You know that coal and petroleum are fossil fuels. It required the dead organisms millions of years to get converted into these fuels. On the other hand, the known reserves of these will last only a few hundred years. Moreover, bur ning of these fuels is a major cause of air pollution. Their use is also linked to global warming. It is therefore necessary that w e u s e t h e s e f u e l s o n l y w h e n absolutely necessary. This will result in better environment, smaller risk of global warming and their availability for a longer period of time. In India, the Petroleum Conservation Research Association advises people how to save petroldiesel while driving. Their tips are drive at a constant and moderate speed as far as possible, switch off the engine at traffic lights or at a place where you have to wait, ensure correct tyre pressure. ensure regular maintenance of the vehicle. 61 201819"}